the universe rather beautiful isn't it
it's quite literally got everything from
the very big to the very small sure
there are some less than savory elements
in there but at the whole scholars agree
that its existence is probably a good
thing such a good thing that entire
field of scientific endeavor is devoted
to its study this is known as cosmology
cosmologists look at what's out there in
space and piece together the tale of how
our universe evolved what it's doing now
what it's going to be doing and how it
all began in the first place it was
Edwin Hubble who first noticed that our
universe is expanding by noting the
galaxies seem to be flying further and
further apart
this implied that everything should have
started with the monumental explosion of
an infinitely hot infinitely small point
this idea was jokingly referred to at
the time as the Big Bang but as the
evidence piled up the notion and the
name actually stuck we know that after
the Big Bang the universe cooled down to
form the stars and galaxies that we see
today cosmologists have plenty of ideas
about how this happened
but we can also probe the origins of the
universe by recreating the hot dense
conditions that existed at the beginning
of time in the laboratory this is done
by particle physicists over the past
century particle physicists have been
studying matter and forces at higher and
higher energies firstly with cosmic rays
and then with particle accelerators
machines that smash together subatomic
particles at great energies the greater
the energy of the accelerator the
further back in time they can
effectively peak today things are
largely made up of atoms but hundreds of
seconds after the Big Bang it was too
hot for electrons to join atomic nuclei
to make atoms instead the universe
consisted of a swirling sea of
mcmartin a few seconds after the Big
Bang it was hotter still hot enough to
overpower the forces that usually hold
protons and neutrons together in atomic
nuclei further back microseconds after
the Big Bang and the protons and
neutrons were only just beginning to
form from quarks one of the fundamental
building blocks of the standard model of
particle physics further back still and
the energy was too great even for the
quarks istic together physicists hope
that by going to even greater energies
they can see back to a time when all the
forces were one and the same
which would make understanding the
origins of the universe a lot easier to
do that they'll not only need to build
bigger colliders but also work hard to
combine our knowledge of the very very
big with the very very small and share
these fascinating insights with each
other and with well.you and that's how
it should be because after all when it
comes to our universe we're all in this
one together
Oh